---
layout: default
---

## Introduction

I've been thinking about writing this for some time, as I feel it has valuable historic information in it - at least for me - about some of my efforts in my early computer career, mostly while I was young and dumb and very very excited about technology and discovering new things.

Details including locations, institutions, companies, individuals have been omitted or changed, mostly so that I can be honest with what happened, but also because as proud as I am of some of this history, it probably wouldn't look that good for me or my current employer should someone come by and wave a printed copy of this around. Maybe I'm overthinking that, but it's what I've chosen.

If you come across this, and you think you know who I am, I won't confirm it. You're welcome to ask. And if I do confirm it then that is definitely a sign that you have the wrong person. I have a terrible poker face, so save us both of us the awkwardness, and sit back and enjoy the story, hopefully as much as I have enjoyed writing it.

Also, I'm happy to take comments, feedback, requests for more information etc. Just [open an issue against this repository](https://github.com/midwinter5791/history/issues) and I'll do my best to respond with an appropriate update. That seems like the GitHub friendly way to do this.

## In the beginning

In the late 80's my family got a computer for Christmas. It was an Atari 130XE 8bit computer. It was pretty exciting getting everything out of the box and running the cables across the floor to the TV, getting it tuned in (if I recall correctly) and then figuring things out. I had no idea how it worked, but it came with some games such as [Dandy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dandy_(video_game)), a multi-user dungeon crawler. The aspirations for that game by the way are tremendous, detailed on that linked Wikipedia page. The "Thesis of Terror" section is a great read. My dad worked for the national mail delivery service, and it seemed that there were others who worked there also who had Atari computers, as he would often come home with copies of new games, and sometimes even new hardware for the computer, such as a touch tablet, a plotter printer, and a modification kit for the Atari 1050 disk drive that let you override the read/write protect notch using a switch on the outside of the drive.

Being a kid, my interest in games was definitely there, but I was also very intrigued by the inclusion of a large text-book style guide to programming, called "[An Invitation to Programming](https://www.atarimania.com/game-atari-400-800-xl-xe-invitation-to-programming-1-an_11651.html)". This was a workbook, combined with an audio cassette tape that had a combination of program code and narrated audio on it. The Atari had the ability to programatically start and stop the cassette recorder for playback through the television. This meant that the program could load, display some introductory information on the screen, then wait for a keypress or number of seconds while the accompanying narration was completed. The end result was a very effective tutorial for programming, delivered right into our living room. You can [see this in action on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bOmWh7Oue74) (warning: high pitched sounds, and probably terribly boring unless you're reliving your youth).

## The local Atari User Group

Atari User Groups were spread all over the world. We had one in my city, and they met once a month. I could hardly believe my luck when I heard about this. The meeting was on a weeknight, and as I lived out of the city my parents arranged for me to stay with my Nana and Granddad to attend. A friend of my dad's would collect me from their place, and return me afterwards. These groups usually had about twenty people in attendance, and while there was some kind of arranged talks sometimes, most of the hustle and bustle was around copying games from one computer to another. This piracy was done freely and in the open, and without any acknowledgment of it being a bad thing to do.

In fact, as a show of my naivety I actually went as far as printing out a list of software I would be happy to copy for a small fee, $1 or $2, so long as you provided the floppy disks. I stapled this list of software onto the noticeboard at my high school. It wasn't there for very long before the computer teacher took it down and told me that it wasn't appropriate. I regarded him with the same I would that an athiest would regard a churchgoer trying to convince them that they should really keep their Sunday free and consider going to church once in a while.

During the Atari User Group meetings I met other young people who were mostly there with their parents (usually the dad) and they were mostly into playing games. I was too, but I was also very interested in the tech side of things. It was at this club that I discovered excellent text book resources, such as "[Basic Atari Basic](https://www.amazon.com/Basic-Atari-BASIC-James-Coan/dp/0810465264)" and "[Mapping The Atari](https://atariprojects.org/2021/06/20/purchase-or-download-the-atari-8-bit-programming-reference-book-mapping-the-atari-5-10-mins/)", the latter of which is a delightful walk through the internals of the Atari memory space, detailing all these ways that the computer worked. I spent many many hours crashing my computer as I tried POKE-ing different values into the different memory locations to see how they affected the machine.

I'm surprised that I didn't get into writing 6502 assembly code as that seemed like a natural step from using BASIC given the resources I was consuming. I put this down to simply not having the resources to hand such as a compiler or information about how to start. This was prior to the Internet of course.

## High School

My earlier run in with the computer teacher had left a slightly sour taste in my mouth. The kids all knew that it was against the rules to be playing computer games in the computer room. At lunchtime this room was often open for students to be able to work on their projects. Occasionally a teacher would pop their head through the door just to check on people. Sometimes when a teacher who was a stickler for the rules was approaching we would get a heads up from a keen student. "Mr. Jones is coming!" he would say and the kids would quickly restart their computers and Mr. Jones would do a quiet loop of the room hovering over people's shoulders to see what they were doing. The more adept of us would already be loading our work off a floppy disk, but the game players who had no idea what to do would sit there looking as guilty as sin, like a naughty dog, and Mr. Jones would make the most of this before telling them to scram.

One lunchtime the whole room was caught in full game playing mode. The computer teacher himself walked in and pressed the emergency stop power button on the inside of the room. There was a loud thump as all of the computers turned off at once. We quickly collected ourselves and filed out of the room looking at the floor as he announced that the computer room would be closed for lunchtimes for the next week. The mischievous streak in me unlocked one of the windows next to the sliding door which was a secondary entry to the room, and a few minutes after the computer teacher had left I opened the window, unlocked the sliding door, and re-entered the room.

The computers were all [BBC Micro](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBC_Micro)'s, and one of the fun commands that the comprehensive BBC Micro Basic had was the [ENVELOPE](https://stardot.org.uk/mirrors/www.bbcdocs.com/filebase/library/pubs/musicmasterclass/bbc_mm_02.htm) command. You could use this to generate any sound you liked, so long as you were patient with the parameters and the time required to get something decent sounding. Or, you could just throw random values at it and enjoy the cacophony that came out of the speaker. I had a program on floppy disk already called something like ANNOY.BAS or similar, and when run it would say "Press any key to annoy". When you pressed a key it would disable all the keyboard keys including the BREAK key (I think), start flashing bright colours on the screen, and going crazy with the ENVELOPE command. The BBC Micro speaker was a decent powerhouse for what it was. The only way to turn off the annoyer was to power off the machine, thus losing the program, and making it not easy to copy.

I loaded up this program onto all 10 or 12 computers, then after a final check of the room, locking the window and the sliding door that I had entered by, I did a loop of the room starting the annoyer, and then exited the computer room, locking the door behind me. The muffled noise sounded like an arcade parlour, and the flashing was clearly visible underneath the door.

I went off to my next class, but it wasn't long before I had a visit there from the computer teacher. He was irate. I confessed immediately. I was banned from the room for two weeks and was given a detention. Looking back, that was a glorious prank and I wish that I had the foresight to plan that ahead of time, but it was purely opportunistic as I filed out of that room.

Half way through my time at high school we upgraded the computer at home from an Atari 130XE to an Atari 520STE. One of the driving factors for this was that my dad wanted to do some video titling work, and the ST had genlock support. I incorrectly had thought that the hardware that we had that allowed this was called a "genlock" but it must have been something else, as genlock (generator locking) is a technology used to synchronise two different video feeds. Maybe the genlock support was a requirement for whatever the software was doing.

I never really got into low level programming on the Atari ST. It didn't come with any built in BASIC interpreter, which for me immediately limited what it was possible to do with it. It was in my experience more of a productivity or gaming machine. We thrashed it on the gaming front, playing great games such as Carrier Command, Robocop, Xenon II, Stunt Car Racer, Double Dragon, Another World. I could go on. I paid an excruciating amount of money for an external hard drive for my Atari ST and this was an excellent addition to my system. I have a large regret that many years later someone talked to my dad about the hardware and asked if they could have it, and I said yes as it had been long unused by me. Oh well.

I discovered that my local bookshop had Atari ST magazines for sale. These came with a cover disk, sometimes two. These were an absolute lifeline to the outside world for me, reading about upcoming games, programming techniques, and having them accompanied with actual usable resources on the cover disks. It was through one of these that I got a hold of [GFA Basic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GFA_BASIC) which then let me start writing BASIC on the Atari. It looks foreign to me now, but I recall back in the day using it for a lot of things. I used it to make an encrypted diary tool that I entered my private thoughts into daily for at least six months, but I was devastated when due to an error by my own hand I lost the lot of it.

## Tertiary Study

For some reason at the start of my final year at high school the school decided that it wasn't in the best interests of the school and/or the students for them to run a computer studies class. How very short sighted! There was talk of combining resources with another nearby school to run the class, but this never eventuated. As a result I ended up having to pick another subject to study in my final year, and I chose chemistry, mostly because I thought that this shouldn't be too hard to pick up, as I was pretty good at analytical thinking and doing pretty good at math.

The class was a pretty hard slog, and I felt like the teacher didn't do me any favours in terms of helping me get up to speed which I desperately needed. After an abysmal mid-year exam result in this subject, and falling grades elsewhere I left high school part way through to move on to tertiary study. I still remember the day I left school, standing there with my friends in an awkward kind of way saying ok well I'm off now I'll see you later and I never really saw them again at all.

I had been put ahead a year at school when I was at primary school, as I had pretty good reading skills. It didn't do me any harm, but here I found that I was about 18 months younger than the new entrants for tertiary study. As a result of that, and also because the year-long classes had already started for the year, I enrolled in a six month long introductory computer course. Of course, I needed no introduction to computers, so this was a pretty fun course for me, and also where I was first introduced to two key things: the Pascal programming language, and a Novell Netware network.

But, more importantly for me, I was now surrounded by people much cleverer than I was! There were students who were one, two, and three years ahead of me who were happy to share their knowledge, and tell me about what a network was, and how it worked, and show me code that they had written, and help me write stuff. I was very much the apprentice to the masters, and boy did I learn a lot. I can honestly say this was the most exciting time I have ever had learning about computers, and the experience made me want to share that same thrill with others, and that is something I carry with me today which keeps me fired up about teaching.

The change from high school to tertiary study was massive. The lecturers are there to lecture, not to make sure your sorry ass is in class. They don't care, they don't go around handing out detentions, so if you miss a class but catch up on the work later because you were doing something more interesting, which in my case was self-learning, then that's no problem. And I did a LOT of self learning. The local university had a book shop, and I was excited to find that they had an online catalog that let you search for books they could order in, accessible via telnet (the web wasn't really around so much at this point), and one of the students showed me how to connect to it from the campus I was on. I searched this online database and found some books about Novell Netware, and soon enough I had one in my hot hands.

## A WAN, the ultimate playground

With my newly acquired access to the Novell Network, my wise masters, and a reference book I started hacking things together myself. I use the term hacking here, not as a journey of spreading my wings and figuring out all the hidden corners (that will come) but more like I did in the early days with my Atari, reading the reference book and writing programs that would try to interact with the network.

I was particularly inspired by the "SEND" command on Novell Netware, which could be used to send a message from your local machine to another machine on the network. This was the second time I had ever seen information travel from one computer to another over a network, with the first time being a year earlier when a high school friend snuck me into a university lab and showed me how to use the "BROADCAST PORT" or "BRO PO" as I believe it could be shortened to, on some UNIX or VAX system. The SEND command could be used to send a message from one computer to another, and the message would show on the bottom line of the DOS screen in reverse text, saying something like:

```
FROM myUser> Hello, how are you doing today              (Ctrl-Enter to clear)
```

This led to many hours of annoying other students, and wasting time chatting with others as well. It was particularly annoying for those students who were running Windows (3.1) applications, as at the time there was no equivalent Windows network messaging client installed by the system administrators, so receiving a message while running Windows would lock the machine up, as the message was "displayed" where it couldn't be seen, and Ctrl-Enter could not be pressed. I discovered much later that the CASTON and CASTOFF commands could be used, and I suggested that they be added to the launch scripts for running Windows, which solved this problem.

To my surprise one day I received a message from our network administrator, advising of upcoming system downtime. This message read something like:

```
> Downtime in approx. 10 minutes, please save your work  (Ctrl-Enter to clear)
```

I was intrigued - every other message I had seen was prefixed with "FROM myUser>" - how on earth could this one be sent like that? I popped my head into the network admin room (where I was a regular and probably annoying question asker) and asked the young tech guy how he did that? "Oh, I just wrote a program to do it" he said. I shot away and looked through my Novell Netware book to find how he possibly managed this and couldn't find it. I gave up after a while, but I would come to find the answer later.

One of the other students a couple of years ahead of me had written a chat program for the network. I believe it used the IPX protocol for communication, and even better than the one line at a time chat, you could send messages one key at a time, thus you could see the other person typing, and they could see you typing. I think he had finished his studies, so my attempt to get a hold of the source code didn't work out.

## Learning the ropes

After the introductory course I then enrolled in the proper course, something akin to a computer science course. The course took us on a great journey around the insides of a computer, how the 386 CPU archicture including memory addressing, how files were stored on disk (FAT, FAT-12, FAT-16, what a MBR was, etc.), and how networks worked. Part of this also included writing code using x86 assembler, and part of that journey was how to use a disassembler as well. This was a new level of tinkering - the ability to see the internal recipe of how a program sent instructions to the CPU was pretty mind blowing. It also gave the opportunity to be able to inspect programs that I had been working with for some time, including the SEND command I mentioned earlier.

I turned my disassembler to the SEND command and found that the prefix "FROM myUser>" was created by the command itself. This meant that if I adjusted the compiled code (something I definitely do not have patience for nowadays) I could remove that part and send any message I wanted to. This included sending my own fake "FROM ..." prefix on messages. I used this new tool a little bit, but it quickly got me in trouble as you might imagine.

For the next part of the story, I need to touch on network permissions. The network was set up in such a way that the resources on the network (disk quota was the biggest restriction) were shared amongst all of the users who had access to the network. You yourself had the F:\USERS\MYUSER directory as your home directory, but the network permission were such that you could only see directories you had access to. The user creation process would set up a directory with your user name and grant you access to it. All users became familiar with the F:\USERS\MYUSER directory, and that was the only directory they could see in there.

As the owner of your own home directory you had the permission to be able to grant access to other people. This suited my needs as I wanted somewhere where others could write files to - a common area if you will - however when I assigned a subdirectory of my home directory to everyone there were then complaints like "What is this MYUSER directory, should I save my work there?" so I stopped sharing my directory pretty quickly.

I then scaled back my ambition and shared access to a subdirectory to individually named users, rather than EVERYONE, thus avoiding the visibility problem. Those who had access knew what was going on, but popularity increased, and eventually some of the staff saw my "MYUSER" directory on other user's screens, and started asking questions. Back to square one.

Speaking of disk quotas, at some stage I also discovered that there was the facility for email delivery on the network. This wasn't connected to the public Internet, only for users on the network. There was no program available to users to be able to use the system, but we obtained a copy of Pegasus Mail from the local university network, and were able to use that. The system administrators had not implemented a per-user disk quota on the mail volume, so we were able to map a drive to the mail volume and use that as storage. I remember storing a copy of Microsoft Flight simulator in that directory.

## Hunt for the Holy Grail

I was on the hunt now. I needed a way to allow everyone to read and write files in a common directory, but for it not to be so blatantly obvious. I needed another place to save files that I could grant access from, but it couldn't be my home directory as it was in a blatantly obvious place.

I started using the "dir /s /b" command to perform a recursive bare subdirectory listing on the network, looking for things of interest. Shortly thereafter I wrote a Pascal program that walked the directory tree, trying to create and delete a file in each directory. Most failed. Most. There were some applications installed on the network for us to use, such as Borland Turbo Pascal, and the [WordPerfect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WordPerfect) word processor. My directory walker and permission checker revealed a surprise - the WordPerfect application directory had a subdirectory called (for example) F:\APPS\WP\SETTINGS\MYUSER. This directory was used to hold my per-user perferences, e.g. settings and personal dictionary files. I opened WordPerfect on my computer and looked in the settings, and sure enough there was the path F:\APPS\WP\SETTINGS\MYUSER. I dropped to DOS and checked the directory and found that I owned it and therfore I could grant access to others. Bingo! Finding a world-writeable directory that was not immediately visible was solved!

## The Tinkerer's Workshop

As part of learning the network I found that it was possible to get the MAC address of where someone was logged into. The built in Novell Netware command "USERLIST" would show who was logged onto the system, but not where they were logged on. I found the Novell system call to obtain this information, and then wrote my own USERLIST command, including showing their MAC address. This alone was not helpful, but I added to my login script another program that would get the MAC address from the local machine, and if I didn't have it in a database already, it would ask me to describe where I was. I used a standard reference to the physical world, e.g. Building 3, Floor 5, Room 12, Workstation 3. Now that I had this world-writeable directory I spread the MAC address checker amongst my friends, and it wasn't long before we had all the machines on the network mapped out.

There were some tricky machines to get - we could see users logged onto them, but we didn't know where they were. These were generally administrative staff, and in some case lecturers. Some sneaky covert operations and deduction filled in about 95% of all machines on campus. This then paved the way for the creation of a tool called WHEREIS. You would use it like so:

```
F:\USERS\MYUSER> whereis THATUSER
THATUSER is currently logged on at:
* Building 2, Floor 5, Room 12, Workstation 3
* Building 2, Floor 5, Room 12, Workstation 4
```

And sure enough, where I went over there, THATUSER would be logged on doing some work, and beside them they would have another screen open with some reference material. Multi-monitor machines would not be common for at least another five years.

With WHOIS and WHEREIS this then paved the way for a new command, HOWIS. HOWIS was a utility that would let user say _how_ they were. This was often used to post a small status update, or say "I am studying for the upcoming XXXX exam" or "I'm looking for help with reading a .XYZ file". These statuses were saved in the world-writeable directory I mentioned earlier - with the path to that directory being compiled into the application. It would have made some sense to store the WHEREIS and HOWIS utilities in there as well, but I didn't want to alert anyone to the location, as it was wide open and available for inspection by anyone. In some ways I like to think that I had stumbled across the idea of microblogging a good ten years before it gained traction, except it didn't have the history or public discovery functionality that the likes of [Identi.ca](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identi.ca) or Twitter did.

## CONNECT 2400

Around about this time I met up with another student who asked me if I had heard of BBS's. I had no idea what that was, and so he said to come over to his place and we would have a look. What he showed me was mind blowing - using a modem to connect to a Bulletin Board Service. The vibrant colours and ANSI splash screens that dribbled over the screen and the absolute shock on my face when he told me that there were multiple BBS's in the city I lived in and you could connect to them for free and start messaging other people, playing turn-based games and share files. On that very day I went down to a local computer shop and bought a 2400 baud modem. I was so eager to get it up and running that I tried plugging it into one of the PC's in one of the computer rooms, but found that I was missing a cable (specifically a DB25 to DB9 serial cable). I ran back into town to get one (a 40 minute two-way run) and got it working, only to find that the phone line in the computer room was only an internal extension and not connected to the outside world.

I took the modem home though, and plugged it into my Atari ST, and scrabbled through the cover disks I had from the Atari magazines and found a terminal program and connected to the BBS's from home. It was like doing lines of cocaine. I would be up until 3 or 4 in the morning, get a few hours sleep, then back on the bus to classes the next morning. I missed the bus many times, but it didn't matter as nobody was chasing me up. My grades started to suffer, but I was having an absolute blast.

## The Internet from the University

My tertiary institution was a little bit behind the local university. They had had Internet access for some time. A Computer Science friend of mine showed me the process of using FTP and Gopher to access remote systems. "This one is in Germany" he said with a twinkle in his eye, and shortly thereafter he was downloading a file. "Wow, that's cool, can we see the contents?" I asked. "Yes, but I need to FTP it from the server I downloaded it to onto my local machine, and I don't have a FTP program on a floppy disk" he replied. This wasn't a disappointment, it was an opportunity. We hacked around for ages on these things, downloading random files and marveling at the wide open world in front of us, all presented through a telnet client (to the local VAX somewhere on campus).

We also discovered that we were able to access one of the servers that I had been doing work on for my studies, even though it was off the university network. This was due to a peering relationship between the two so that my tertiary institution could get Internet access. This access was not publicised to the students, and many of the staff were not aware of it either. My friend told me about a dial in line hosted by the university that could be used to access the university system, however it required an account through the Computer Services team. I eagerly went to fill out the paperwork but got stopped dead in my tracks as I wasn't a student of the university.

## The Internet from my home

Not long after this I became aware of a small family based internet provider that had started up in my city. The history I've read online disagrees with my remembered timing by a matter of five years, but also states that the journey to getting online was long. Maybe it took a few years for them to get business ready. Not long after that, another opened as well. I can't be sure which was first, but regardless I found _my_ one first. I quickly signed up for an account, as this let me use the Internet from home. It was a dial-up account with shell access, no fancy PPP connection, and the sysadmin and his friend had built a basic menu system that had options like "check email", "check usage", "edit file", "connect to host", "access ftp", "run shell", etc. The service could be accessed for about the cost of minimum wage per hour. Good for quick checking of email, but not good for extended online sessions such as chatting on IRC.

The way the system worked is that when you logged off, some accounting scripts would run, and log how long you had been online for. If you had spent more time online than you should have, then your account would be locked, and the login banner when you reconnected would advise you to come into the ISP's offices and pay more money. I did this for a while, but being a poor student I couldn't do it forever, especially at the rate that I wanted to be online. I started looking at the logoff and accounting scripts, as in order to run them I had to be able to access them. Here I spotted a flaw in the scripts which I could use to my advantage.

The first flaw was that the display of the "out of credit" message was achieved by changing the user shell from /bin/bash to another shell. It would display the message, then disconnect. There was no option to interrupt the connection to drop to a shell, as the shell's purpose was to display the message online. As a user of the system however, I could opt to change my shell at any time by using the `chsh` command. I leveraged this by adding a call to `chsh` at midnight to change my login shell to `/bin/bash` which meant that if the accounting tools kicked me off and changed my shell at logout, then I would simply just have to wait until after midnight to get back on.

This became annoying, so I looked closer at the accounting scripts. I noticed that part of these scripts included a call to the `whoami` command which returns the username of the currently logged in user. I couldn't change the accounting scripts, but I was able to manipulate the `$PATH` variable. The usual change that is made to `$PATH` is to add an additional directory to the end, for example:

```
$ export PATH=$PATH:~/bin
```

However, my change was to prepend my `~/bin` directory to the front of the `$PATH`. This meant that if I wrote my own `whoami` command and put it in my ~/bin directory then it would be called in preference to the system `whoami` command that would report my actual name. This meant that the accounting scripts would get a username for a user that did not exist on the system. I chose the name "uhura", after the communications officer on Star Trek's Original Series, a fitting name given I was dealing with communicating on the Internet. This resulted in a mismatch in the accounting system, and as a result at logoff my account was unable to be locked.

The ISP was enjoying popularity, as they initially started with two dial in lines, and then quickly upgraded to 4, and then 8 lines. This meant that if one of those lines was busy with me being logged on all the time it wouldn't block the other users, so my extended usage was less likely to be noticed.

The peering relationship between the local university and my tertiary institution came to an end, but a new agreement between us and _my_ ISP was sorted out, and as a result I was able to telnet into their systems to check my email, download files, etc. I don't think this login method was triggering the login scripts so my online time here didn't count towards my metered usage, nor did it block a user trying to dial in by modem. This didn't give me anything extra in terms of access, but it did give me a channel from the ISP into one of the servers that I had been doing study work on, from home, albeit while triggering the previously neutered accounting system.

If nothing else, this gave me an opportunity to learn more about how TCP/IP networking worked as it was relatively new to me, compared to the IPX based Novell Netware networking.

Eventually however my accounting trick was discovered due to a slip up while helping out another user on the same ISP. I had built up a collection of utilities in my ~/bin directory, and I offered them to that user by instructing them to include my ~/bin directory in their path. Easy peasy, however they included the path at the start, probably because I copied the same export line shown above. This meant that when they logged off and the accounting scripts ran, they would see a message saying "no such user: uhura". They didn't know what was going on there so they contacted the ISP thinking something was wrong, and the trail was unwound pointing back to me.

The owner of the ISP called me in and demanded I pay back the online time I had stolen. I asked him how much it was, terrified that it would be hundreds of hours. He said he would have to go away and find out. When he came back he told me that he was unable to tell how much time I had spent so would let that go, but he was also no longer prepared to offer me a shell account, and instead would offer a PPP only account. This effectively locked me out of being able to play any shell-related tricks on the ISP to get around their accounting system. I call that a lucky break. I met the sysadmin who built the accounting system many many years later, and recounted the story of my illicit access to him. He was adamant that what I described was not possible. All I had to prove it was that it had occurred. "Go ask your Dad, he'll tell you".

## More tinkering

During my final year of study things had truly gone to the dogs. I was struggling to meet any academic achievements at all, but my technical knowledge was swelling. I bought more programming books, including a couple on writing programs using x86 assembler, and I sought out technical reference material from the local library. I also read at least one hacker novel. One I recall fondly was Clifford Stoll's [The Cuckoo's Egg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Cuckoo%27s_Egg_(book)). When I tried to get it out of the local library I was approached by the head librarian to say that I couldn't take that book out of the library as it contained details on how to hack their systems. I didn't take that as an invitation to try, but I did go to another library in my city and get a copy of the book from there. That always struck me as an odd response to getting a book out, and it made me wonder if they had a notification system in place to alert them when certain books were checked out.

I recall getting a copy of [Ralf Brown's Interrupt List](https://wiki.osdev.org/Ralf_Brown%27s_Interrupt_List) which then gave me the keys to the kingdom effectively for the PC, showing how to do things like reboot the computer via code, or change screen modes etc. All of this seemed pretty trivial, but combined it was really setting the stage for becoming an adept DOS-based developer.

Back to the programming. I doubled down on the chat programs. I built two versions of this. The first was a user-to-user chat program. It was character by character, and it was possible to skin the application. Users made it look like the DOS Edit screen, the Turbo Pascal Editor, and the WordPerfect text editor. It became popular as it allowed users to chat in class while appearing to be doing work. It even had a boss key which would then show any screen at all. The skins were defined as a static background, with two windows defined to represent the sending and receiving windows (x1/y1 and x2/y2). The boss key just flipped to a predefined ANSI screen. I used the [The Draw](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TheDraw) to build these screens. I had used this application extensively in the creation of my own BBS.

The second chat program was far more popular. I wrote this in [QuickBasic 4.5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QuickBASIC) and it featured the ability to create channels, see users who were in the channels, use colours for chatting, rename yourself. It was basically a screen split into two vertical columns, with the left column taking up 75% of the screen. This column also had an editing windows at the bottom where you could enter your message before pressing Enter to send it. The right column showed a list of users in the current channel, and there were menu options at the bottom of the screen to allow you to manage the application, following the UX of other applications of the time.

This was a runaway hit but ultimately it again proved to be my downfall as the staff got wind of it and one of the system administrators investigated it and discovered the shared directory that I was using as a file based communications socket. They took steps to shut that down, and I was referred to the head of department for a short sharp talk about keeping a lid on the extra curricular activities. Remember that run in I had with the computer teacher at school? Well this chat was a little bit like that as well.

## Your password is "floppy"

At the start of the year the system administrators would publish a printed list of all users who were taking classes this year, along with their usernames. The usernames were a short version of their name, with a number at the end to deal to any collisions. I was stunned to see also that the initial password for all accounts was "floppy", and that users were asked to change them when they first logged in. I mentioned earlier that network storage was pretty minimal (I think it was actually 4MB of storage) but after a couple of weeks it was simple to go through that list of users and see which users still had "floppy" as a password. This was because they hadn't turned up for their enrolled course for some reason.

Wanting more access though, I started thinking about getting a hold of user's passwords. How could I do this? A common way of doing this was to write a TSR (terminate and stay resident) program that logged all keystrokes and wrote them to a file. This was really tedious, and while it worked, ultimately it made really large files which were hard to find usernames and passwords in. I gave this idea up for a much simpler approach. I made a program that looked like a login screen when run. This is how it worked.

1. I had to be logged onto the computer in question.
2. I then ran the program, it presents a mock login screen.
3. Allow the user to enter their username.
4. Allow the user to enter their password.
5. Log the entered details into a file in my home directory, then silently log me off, presenting the real login prompt.
6. The user entered their username and password into the actual prompts, and was then logged in.

Step #1 was required so that I didn't have to go around trying to find the stored credentials on the machines with the fake logins on it.

The effect was that the user would think they just typo'd their password as it worked the second time. This, combined with the USERLIST program allowed me to remotely see how many machines I was logged on to. Initially the system limited us to only logging on to two machines at once, so I knew that when I was only logged on to one machine that the trap had been sprung, or the computer where the trap was had been turned off.

This process worked really well for collecting usernames and passwords. I ended up with a lot of them. I wasn't really interested in using these credentials for snooping around at what people were saving, as generally it wasn't very interesting to me. The real fun was the challenge of solving the problem. I became more brazen in my attempts, moving through one of the computer labs of another department and leaving my password stealer active there.

Another trap had been sprung, and I checked the username and password to see who it was. I didn't recognise this username, so I used WHOIS to look them up. Notably their username had an indicator on it that marked them as a staff member. My heart skipped a beat - staff had elevated privileges to assist students with their work. They had access to read and change files in all user's directories. I found a quiet room where there was no threat of prying eyes, and logged on as the staff member. I was greeted with the familiar F:\USERS\USERNAME prompt, but when I went back one directory level into F:\USERS and issued a "dir" statement I saw _ALL_ users listed. I almost fell off my chair.

I also quickly noticed that the staff member had the "S" permission in Novell Netware. This is the Supervisor permission, and it allowed me to run system admin commands, such as the user management applications, network configuration programs, and all sorts. I never changed any system settings as I was afraid to mess up the system, but I did create a new user with it's own "S" permission. I used that user from then on whenever I wanted to explore the system with supervisor permission. One change I did make was to raise the limit on the number of concurrent logins that I was able to make from 2 to 10.

## It all comes crashing down

All of this activity surely caused a lot of concern. Was I the first person to go on such a wild wander on the network system? Maybe I was. I suspect everyone including the system administrators were learning the system just like I was, but finally there were enough waves made where they started focussing on what I was up to. I was sitting at a workstation one day and looking at the permissions I had over the files in my home directory. One by one I noticed that they were being removed, and then finally I was unable to even list files that existed in my F:\USERS\MYUSER directory. "What is going on?" I thought, and then a network broadcast message showed on the bottom of my screen like so:

```
Your network access has been removed. Please come and see us in room **** to discuss.
```

Ah crap. This was the second "being caught" incident, and the final one for me. The head of IT was there, and my course supervisor. I didn't get into heaps of trouble, but I was given two choices. First was to hand over my student ID and leave the campus, and the second was to come clean on everything and explain what I had done and how I had done it. I loved all the stuff I had done on the system, and the learning environment and the systems I had access to, even as a regular user. Given those two choices it was a relatively easy one to share all the information. On sharing it became clear they had no idea of how much I had been doing, but I still had fun sharing it. I don't know whether they made any changes as a result.

I saw out my final year, and got really involved in more technology, including working on some community outreach tools to provide learning resources to secondary school students. That involved some site visits to schools where I met with the computer teachers on site. Some of them were really fired up about their roles, and others it appeared they were unhappy to be the person who had been given that job. Interesting to see two different kinds of people in those what I considered technically privileged positions.

## Conclusion

I spent three years in tertiary study, and only achieved one actual year of qualification, but for me the ability to pick and choose what I paid attention to in class, and then what I chose to spend my time learning on was a gift. I took these skills into the workforce and I am enjoying a career developing software, managing computer networks, running internet services, working with ISP's and pretty much everything in between. My advice to anyone looking at getting into computers is to not stop where the closed doors are, and find someone who knows more than you do and ask them heaps of questions.

It's really clear to me that all of that activity happened in the relatively safe confines of my tertiary institute. If I had been conducting the same kind of things on the public Internet or on commercial premises I surely would have had a much bigger fall, and so to that end I'm very thankful for the opportunity to explore and make some waves without it adversely affecting my future.

Some of these stories are know of by staff who still work at the tertiary institution. Maybe they will read this and be certain of who I am. You're welcome to think that you do. I refer you back to the introduction. If you have learned something from reading this then that makes this time and effort I spent putting this together well worthwhile.

As mentioned in the introduction, I'm happy to take comments, feedback, requests for more information etc. Just [open an issue against this repository](https://github.com/midwinter5791/history/issues) and I'll come back to you.

EOF